



Network Working Group                                      P. Liljenberg
Internet-Draft                                         Commons Machinery
Intended status: Experimental                            October 2, 2014
Expires: April 5, 2015


               The blockhash perceptual image URN scheme
                draft-commonsmachinery-urn-blockhash-00

Abstract

   This document describes a URN namespace for identifying images by
   their likeness, encoded as a perceptual hash based on the image
   content.  The naming scheme relies on an algorithm called blockhash.
   The hash is easy to compute but still has a high probability of
   positively identifying an image after it has been shared through
   various Internet services, which typically strip other identifying
   metadata.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 5, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2014 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Liljenberg                Expires April 5, 2015                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Blockhash URN                 October 2014


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY"
   in this document are to be interpreted as defined in "Key words for
   use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [RFC2119].

2.  Introduction

   Most URN namespaces are intended to identify a unique resource
   [RFC1630], e.g. by a unique ID that is assigned by a registry, or
   from a cryptographic hash derived from the resource itself.

   The blockhash URN namespace specified in this document instead
   identifies a unique likeness of a resource, specifically of an image.
   It is intended to be used in situations where an exact match may not
   be possible, e.g. when comparing two instances of an image that might
   have been resized or recoded in different file formats.

   This is achieved by using a perceptual hash based on the blockhash
   algorithm [BLOCKHASH].  A small change in an image also results in a
   correspondingly small change in the blockhash.  This is in contrast
   to a cryptographic hash where even small changes to a file result in
   unpredictable and often large changes in the hash.

   This allows not only the exact comparison of two blockhashes, but
   also makes it possible to determine how similar two images are.  The
   similary is measured as the hamming distance, i.e. the number of bits
   in the two hashes that are different.  Tools using blockhashes can
   then choose a maximum hamming distance that is relevant for the
   particular use case and the precision needed.  Efficient algorithms
   exist to query a set of hashes to find the ones within a given
   distance from a particular hash, e.g. HmSearch [HMSEARCH].

   The primary use case for blockhashes is to implement services that
   can perform a reverse image lookup, i.e. based on the image itself
   find out information about it or find similar images.

   This namespace specification is for a formal namespace.  The
   specification adheres to the guidelines given in "Uniform Resource
   Names (URN) Namespace Definition Mechanisms" [RFC3406].

3.  Specification Template

3.1.  Namespace ID




Liljenberg                Expires April 5, 2015                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Blockhash URN                 October 2014


   "blockhash" requested.

3.2.  Registration information

   Registration version number: 1

   Registration date: 201?-??-??

3.3.  Declared registration of the namespace

   Registering organisation:

      Commons Machinery in Sweden AB Aesgatan 5 646 32 Gnesta Sweden
      http://commonsmachinery.se/

   Designated Contact Person:

      Jonas Oeberg jonas@commonsmachinery.se

3.4.  Declaration of syntactic structure

   The Namespace Specific Strings (NSS) of all URNs assigned by the
   schema described in this document will conform to the syntax defined
   in section 2.2 of [RFC2141].  The formal syntax of the NSS is defined
   by the following normative ABNF [RFC5234] rules for "blockhash-nss":

   blockhash-nss = hexhash
   hexhash       = 1*hex
   hex           = %x30-39 / %x41-46 / %x61-66 ; 0-9, A-F, a-f

   The following are comments and restrictions not captured by the above
   grammar.

   Though both upper-case and lowercase characters are allowed in the
   hexadecimal value, lowercase characters SHOULD be used.

   The number of bits encoded in "hexhash" MUST be M, where, M = N * N
   and N is a multiple of 4.  It is not expected that hash lengths other
   than 64, 144 and 256 bits will make sense.  Blockhashes SHOULD be 256
   bits long unless there is a specific need for a different size.

3.5.  Relevant ancillary documentation

   None as yet.

3.6.  Identifier uniqueness considerations





Liljenberg                Expires April 5, 2015                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Blockhash URN                 October 2014


   A blockhash URN identifies the unique likeness of an image, rather
   than a specific image file.  Within the blockhash scheme, all images
   that produce the same blockhash are considered identicial.

3.7.  Identifier persistence considerations

   The algorithm that calculate a blockhash from an image also establish
   a persistent identifier.  The process can later be repeated on the to
   reproduce the identifier at any point in the lifetime of the image.

3.8.  Process of identifier assignment

   A blockhash identifier is calculated from a digital image, and
   require no more than access to the file or a file that has already
   been decoded into RGB pixels.

   A blockhash SHOULD be calculated following these steps:

   1.  Convert the image to RGB format with an optional alpha channel
       (if not already done).  The standard conversion method of the
       file format SHOULD be used, avoiding any file- or system-specific
       colour profiles.

   2.  Construct a grid of N by N blocks covering the image.  N MUST be
       a multiple of 4.

   3.  Initialise each block to 0.

   4.  For each pixel:

       A.  Decide which blocks the pixel overlaps.  It can be one, two
           or four blocks, depending on the pixel coordinate.

       B.  If the image has an alpha channel and the alpha for the pixel
           is 0 (indicating transparency), set the RGB components to
           their maximum values, otherwise use them as they are.

       C.  Add the sum of the RGB components from the previous step to
           each of the blocks the pixel covers, in proportion to the
           area of the pixel that is in each block.

   5.  Determine the median value of all the blocks.

   6.  For each block, starting with the upper left and progressing row
       by row until the lower right, add a bit to the result hash:

       A.  If the block value is less than the median value, add a 0.




Liljenberg                Expires April 5, 2015                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Blockhash URN                 October 2014


       B.  Otherwise, add a 1.

   7.  Encode the hash in hexadecimal, interpreting the sequence of bits
       as eight-bit bytes.

   8.  Construct a blockhash URN according to the grammar above using
       the hexadecimal representation of the hash.

   Implementations MAY use a different process which yield similar
   results, but SHOULD make users aware if the modified process can
   introduce differences to the standard algorithm which may result in
   false negatives.  One possible alternative to the algorithm described
   above is to resize the image to ensure that each block holds an even
   number of pixels to avoid the calculations in 4a and 4c.

3.9.  Process of identifier resolution

   Not specified.

3.10.  Rules for lexical equivalence

   Lexical equivalence of two blockhash identifiers are determined by
   first converting both hexadecimal strings to lower-case or upper-
   case, and then comparing the resulting strings.

   Alternatively, the hashes can be converted to byte sequences, which
   are then compared.

3.11.  Conformance with URN syntax

   No special considerations.

3.12.  Validation mechanism

   None specified.

3.13.  Scope

   Global.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document includes a URN namespace registration that is to be
   entered into the IANA registry for URN NIDs.

5.  Namespace Considerations





Liljenberg                Expires April 5, 2015                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Blockhash URN                 October 2014


   A new URN namespaces is needed as there are no existing namespaces
   for representing perceptual hashes as URNs in general, and none
   specifically for the blockhash algorithm.

   [I-D.thiemann-hash-urn] proposes a namespace for cryptographic
   hashes, but it is intentionally limited to only allow the hash
   algorithms specified in the internet draft.

   In a similar vein this namespace limited to blockhash itself, to
   avoid having to establish a secondary level of namespace assignments
   for different perceptual hash algorithms.

   The blockhash algorithm was choosen to allow even relatively
   restricted environments (e.g. javascript code in a web browser) to
   produce an image hash, that is still sufficiently precise for
   identifying images as they are shared across the Internet, even after
   resizes, recodings and smaller edits.  More complex perceptual hashes
   exist that can track more complex changes, e.g. large crops or
   rotations, but also put higher requirements on the implementation.

   Representing the hash as a hexadecimal string rather than as a more
   compact base32 is choosen to align the format more closely with the
   underlying bit structure.  This allow code to determine a rough
   hamming distance between two blockhashes just by comparing the
   hexadecimal strings, rather than first having to convert them into
   binary sequences.

   The restriction that the grid width and height must be the same allow
   some scope to implementations to choose a reasonable hash size while
   ensuring that the hash size can always be reconstructed from the hash
   length.  Requiring that the grid width and height must be a multiple
   of 4 ensures that the hash size is a multiple of eight, and thus will
   fill up a sequence of bytes exactly.

6.  Community Considerations

   Internet services today make it very simple to share an image, but
   most loses the context of the original image in the process.  The
   context is where and when the image was created or a photo taken, by
   whom, and what the conditions are for properly sharing the image.  It
   is needed both to avoid copyright infringements, and to give credit
   to the original creator.

   There already exist several reverse image search services, but they
   are generally proprietary, closed implementations, and require users
   to upload the image to the service, potentially violating the user's
   privacy.




Liljenberg                Expires April 5, 2015                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Blockhash URN                 October 2014


   Having a standardised way to refer to a perceptual hash of an image
   will provide new capabilities directly to Internet users to find out
   the context of images, even when they have passed through several
   steps of sharing.

   The blockhash on its own is not sufficient, but it will enable new
   services that can index large collections of images.  Client-side
   tools can then calculate a blockhash and query these indices to find
   more information about the image, preserving the user privacy.

   The scope of this document does not cover processes for finding and
   querying such indices, but enable such future work to build on
   blockhash URNs.

7.  Security Considerations

   Blockhashes are generally only useful when they relate to images that
   are already public and being shared.  As such, producing a blockhash
   of the image and sharing that will not change the security or privacy
   situation significantly.

   For all images that are a few times larger than the grid size, it
   will be practically impossible to reconstruct the original image
   based on its blockhash.  Thus sharing a blockhash of a private image
   does not infringe on the user's privacy directly.  However, if the
   image is later shared, the previously shared blockhash can be used to
   infer that the user had access of the image at the earlier time.

   Images that are not much bigger than the grid size could be
   reproduced in sufficient detail to be identified from a blockhash.
   Such images are usually icons and other non-sensitive content, but
   implementation can also mitigate against this by requiring the user
   to confirm that such a small image should be hashed.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
              "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
              Mechanisms", BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.





Liljenberg                Expires April 5, 2015                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Blockhash URN                 October 2014


   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1630]  Berners-Lee, T., "Universal Resource Identifiers in WWW: A
              Unifying Syntax for the Expression of Names and Addresses
              of Objects on the Network as used in the World-Wide Web",
              RFC 1630, June 1994.

   [BLOCKHASH]
              Yang, B., Gu, F., and X. Niu, "Block Mean Value Based
              Image Perceptual Hashing", December 2006.

   [HMSEARCH]
              Zhang, X., Qin, J., Wang, W., Sun, Y., and J. Lu,
              "HmSearch: an efficient hamming distance query processing
              algorithm", July 2013.

   [I-D.thiemann-hash-urn]
              Thiemann, P., "A URN Namespace For Identifiers Based on
              Cryptographic Hashes", draft-thiemann-hash-urn-01 (work in
              progress), September 2003.

Appendix A.  Experimental results

   For images in general, the blockhash algorithm generates the same
   blockhash value for two different images in 0,007% (0.7 per 10,000)
   of the cases (data based on a random sampling of 29,649 images).

   For photographs, the algorithm generates practically unique
   blockhashes, but for icons, clipart and other images, the algorithm
   generates less unique blockhashses.

   Larger areas of the same color (in particular black) in an image,
   either as a background or borders, result in hashes that collide in
   1,9% (190 per 10,000) of cases.

Author's Address

   Peter Liljenberg
   Commons Machinery
   Aesgatan 5
   Gnesta  64632
   SE

   Email: dev@commonsmachinery.se
   URI:   http://commonsmachinery.se/



Liljenberg                Expires April 5, 2015                 [Page 8]
